add dumpling into tidb tools (#3453)
pingcap/docs: dumpling-overview.md

```

The TiDB historical data snapshots when the TSO is `417773951312461825` and the time is `2020-07-02 17:12:45` are exported.

### TiDB GC settings when exporting a large volume of data

When exporting data from TiDB, if the TiDB version is greater than v4.0.0 and Dumpling can access the PD address of the TiDB cluster, Dumpling automatically extends the GC time without affecting the original cluster. But for TiDB earlier than v4.0.0, you need to manually modify the GC time.

In other scenarios, if the data size is very large, to avoid export failure due to GC during the export process, you can extend the GC time in advance:

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
update mysql.tidb set VARIABLE_VALUE = '720h' where VARIABLE_NAME = 'tikv_gc_life_time';
```

After your operation is completed, set the GC time back (the default value is `10m`):

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
update mysql.tidb set VARIABLE_VALUE = '10m' where VARIABLE_NAME = 'tikv_gc_life_time';
```

Finally, all the exported data can be imported back to TiDB using [Lightning](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-tidb-backend.md).

## Option list of Dumpling

| Options | Usage | Default value |
| --------| --- | --- |

> | -V or --version | Output the Dumpling version and exit directly |
> | -B or --database | Export specified databases |
> | -T or --tables-list | Export specified tables |
> | -f or --filter | Export tables that match the filter pattern. For the filter syntax, see [table-filter](/table-filter.md). | `"\*.\*"` (export all databases or tables) |
> | --case-sensitive | whether table-filter is case-sensitive | false (case-insensitive) |
> | -h or --host| The IP address of the connected database host | "127.0.0.1" |
> | -t or --threads | The number of concurrent backup threads | 4 |
> | -r or --rows | Divide the table into specified rows of data (generally applicable for concurrent operations of splitting a large table into multiple files. |
> | -L or --logfile | Log output address. If it is empty, the log will be output to the console | "" |
> | --loglevel | Log level {debug,info,warn,error,dpanic,panic,fatal} | "info" |
> | --logfmt | Log output format {text,json} | "text" |
> | -d or --no-data | Do not export data (suitable for scenarios where only the schema is exported) |
> | --no-header | Export CSV files of the tables without generating header |
> | -W or --no-views| Do not export the views | true |
> | -m or --no-schemas | Do not export the schema with only the data exported |
> | -s or--statement-size | Control the size of the `INSERT` statements; the unit is bytes |
> | -F or --filesize | The file size of the divided tables. The unit must be specified such as `128B`, `64KiB`, `32MiB`, and `1.5GiB`. |
> | --filetype| Exported file type (csv/sql) | "sql" |
> | -o or --output | Exported file path | "./export-${time}" |
> | -S or --sql | Export data according to the specified SQL statement. This command does not support concurrent export. |
> | --consistency | flush: use FTWRL before the dump <br/> snapshot: dump the TiDB data of a specific snapshot of a TSO <br/> lock: execute `lock tables read` on all tables to be dumped <br/> none: dump without adding locks, which cannot guarantee consistency <br/> auto: MySQL defaults to using flush, TiDB defaults to using snapshot | "auto" |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `-V` or `--version` | Output the Dumpling version and exit directly |
| `-B` or `--database` | Export specified databases |
| `-T` or `--tables-list` | Export specified tables |
| `-f` or `--filter` | Export tables that match the filter pattern. For the filter syntax, see [table-filter](/table-filter.md). | `"\*.\*"` (export all databases or tables) |
| `--case-sensitive` | whether table-filter is case-sensitive | false (case-insensitive) |
| `-h` or `--host` | The IP address of the connected database host | "127.0.0.1" |
| `-t` or `--threads` | The number of concurrent backup threads | 4 |
| `-r` or `--rows` | Divide the table into specified rows of data (generally applicable for concurrent operations of splitting a large table into multiple files. |
| `-L` or `--logfile` | Log output address. If it is empty, the log will be output to the console | "" |
| `--loglevel` | Log level {debug,info,warn,error,dpanic,panic,fatal} | "info" |
| `--logfmt` | Log output format {text,json} | "text" |
| `-d` or `--no-data` | Do not export data (suitable for scenarios where only the schema is exported) |
| `--no-header` | Export CSV files of the tables without generating header |
| `-W` or `--no-views` | Do not export the views | true |
| `-m` or `--no-schemas` | Do not export the schema with only the data exported |
| `-s` or `--statement-size` | Control the size of the `INSERT` statements; the unit is bytes |
| `-F` or `--filesize` | The file size of the divided tables. The unit must be specified such as `128B`, `64KiB`, `32MiB`, and `1.5GiB`. |
| `--filetype` | Exported file type (csv/sql) | "sql" |
| `-o` or `--output` | Exported file path | "./export-${time}" |
| `-S` or `--sql` | Export data according to the specified SQL statement. This command does not support concurrent export. |
| `--consistency` | flush: use FTWRL before the dump <br/> snapshot: dump the TiDB data of a specific snapshot of a TSO <br/> lock: execute `lock tables read` on all tables to be dumped <br/> none: dump without adding locks, which cannot guarantee consistency <br/> auto: MySQL defaults to using flush, TiDB defaults to using snapshot | "auto" |
```

| --snapshot | snapshot TSO; valid only when `consistency=snapshot` |
| --where | Specify the scope of the table backup through the `where` condition |

> | -p or --password | The password of the linked node |

Author: ```suggestion
| -p or --password | The password of the connected database host |
```

> | --snapshot | snapshot TSO; valid only when `consistency=snapshot` |
> | --where | Specify the scope of the table backup through the `where` condition |
> | -p or --password | The password of the connected database host |
> | -P or --port | The port of the connected database host | 4000 |
> | -u or --user | The username of the connected database host | "root" |
> | --dump-empty-database | Export the `CREATE DATABASE` statements of the empty databases | true |
> | --ca | The address of the certificate authority file for TLS connection |
> | --cert | The address of the client certificate file for TLS connection |
> | --key | The address of the client private key file for TLS connection |
> | --csv-delimiter | Delimiter of character type variables in CSV files | '"' |
> | --csv-separator | Separator of each value in CSV files | ',' |
> | --csv-null-value | Representation of null values in CSV files | "\\N" |
> | --escape-backslash | Use backslash (`\`) to escape special characters in the export file | true |
> | --output-filename-template | The filename templates represented in the format of [golang template](https://golang.org/pkg/text/template/#hdr-Arguments) <br/> Support the `{{.DB}}`, `{{.Table}}`, and `{{.Index}}` arguments <br/> The three arguments represent the database name, table name, and chunk ID of the data file | '{{.DB}}.{{.Table}}.{{.Index}}' |
> | --status-addr | Dumpling's service address, including the address for Prometheus to pull metrics and pprof debugging | ":8281" |
> | --tidb-mem-quota-query | The memory limit of exporting SQL statements by a single Dumpling command, the unit is byte, and the default value is 32 GB | 34359738368 |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `--snapshot` | Snapshot TSO; valid only when `consistency=snapshot` |
| `--where` | Specify the scope of the table backup through the `where` condition |
| `-p` or `--password` | The password of the connected database host |
| `-P` or `--port` | The port of the connected database host | 4000 |
| `-u` or `--user` | The username of the connected database host | "root" |
| `--dump-empty-database` | Export the `CREATE DATABASE` statements of the empty databases | true |
| `--ca` | The address of the certificate authority file for TLS connection |
| `--cert` | The address of the client certificate file for TLS connection |
| `--key` | The address of the client private key file for TLS connection |
| `--csv-delimiter` | Delimiter of character type variables in CSV files | '"' |
| `--csv-separator` | Separator of each value in CSV files | ',' |
| `--csv-null-value` | Representation of null values in CSV files | "\\N" |
| `--escape-backslash` | Use backslash (`\`) to escape special characters in the export file | true |
| `--output-filename-template` | The filename templates represented in the format of [golang template](https://golang.org/pkg/text/template/#hdr-Arguments) <br/> Support the `{{.DB}}`, `{{.Table}}`, and `{{.Index}}` arguments <br/> The three arguments represent the database name, table name, and chunk ID of the data file | '{{.DB}}.{{.Table}}.{{.Index}}' |
| `--status-addr` | Dumpling's service address, including the address for Prometheus to pull metrics and pprof debugging | ":8281" |
| `--tidb-mem-quota-query` | The memory limit of exporting SQL statements by a single line of Dumpling command, the unit is byte, and the default value is 32 GB | 34359738368 |
```

Dumpling can also export specific databases with the `-B` option or specific tables with the `-T` option.

> **Note:**
> 
> - The `--filter` option and the `-T` option cannot be used at the same time.
>
> - The `-T` option can only accept a complete form of inputs like `database-name.table-name`, and inputs with only the table name are not accepted. Example: Dumpling cannot recognize `-T WorkOrder`.

Examples:

-`-B employees` exports the `employees` database
-`-T employees.WorkOrder` exports the `employees.WorkOrder` table

### Improve export efficiency through concurrency

The exported file is stored in the `./export-<current local time>` directory by default. Commonly used parameters are as follows:

- `-o` is used to select the directory where the exported files are stored.
- `-F` option is used to specify the maximum size of a single file (the unit here is `MiB`; inputs like `5GiB` or `8KB` are also acceptable).
- `-r` option is used to specify the maximum number of records (or the number of rows in the database) for a single file. When it is enabled, Dumpling enables concurrency in the table to improve the speed of exporting large tables.

> You can use the above parameters to provide Dumpling with a higher degree of concurrency.

Author: ```suggestion
With the above options specified, Dumpling can have a higher degree of parallelism.
```
How about this ⬆️? @lichunzhu  (Degree of Parallelism is a term that is more commonly used. [ref](https://docs.microsoft.com/zh-cn/sql/relational-databases/policy-based-management/set-the-max-degree-of-parallelism-option-for-optimal-performance?view=sql-server-ver15))

> You can use the above parameters to provide Dumpling with a higher degree of concurrency.

Reviewer 2: Looks great to me

When exporting data from TiDB, if the TiDB version is greater than v4.0.0 and Dumpling can access the PD address of the TiDB cluster, Dumpling automatically extends the GC time without affecting the original cluster. But for TiDB earlier than v4.0.0, you need to manually modify the GC time.

In other scenarios, if the data volume is very large, to avoid export failure due to GC during the export process, you can extend the GC time in advance:

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
update mysql.tidb set VARIABLE_VALUE = '720h' where VARIABLE_NAME = 'tikv_gc_life_time';
```

After your operation is completed, set the GC time back (the default value is `10m`):

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
update mysql.tidb set VARIABLE_VALUE = '10m' where VARIABLE_NAME = 'tikv_gc_life_time';
```

Finally, all the exported data can be imported back to TiDB using [Lightning](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-tidb-backend.md).

## Option list of Dumpling

| Options | Usage | Default value |
| --------| --- | --- |
| -V or --version | Output the Dumpling version and exit directly |
| -B or --database | Export specified databases |
| -T or --tables-list | Export specified tables |

> | -f or --filter | Export tables that match the filter pattern. For the filter syntax, see[table-filter](/table-filter.md). | `"\*.\*"` (export all databases or tables) |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| -f or --filter | Export tables that match the filter pattern. For the filter syntax, see [table-filter](/table-filter.md). | `"\*.\*"` (export all databases or tables) |
```

| --case-sensitive | whether table-filter is case-sensitive | false (case-insensitive) |

> | -h or --host| The address of the linked node | "127.0.0.1" |

Author: ```suggestion
| -h or --host| The IP address of the database server | "127.0.0.1" |
```
Is it more accurate? @tangenta

> | -h or --host| The address of the linked node | "127.0.0.1" |

Reviewer 2: host name of database server

Author: ```suggestion
| -h or --host| The IP address of the database server | "127.0.0.1" |
```
Is it more accurate? @tangenta

Reviewer 2: Yes.

| -r or --rows | Divide the table into specified rows of data (generally applicable for concurrent operations of splitting a large table into multiple files. |
| -L or --logfile | Log output address. If it is empty, the log will be output to the console | "" |
| --loglevel | Log level {debug,info,warn,error,dpanic,panic,fatal} | "info" |
| --logfmt | Log output format {text,json} | "text" |
| -d or --no-data | Do not export data (suitable for scenarios where only the schema is exported) |
| --no-header | Export CSV files of the tables without generating header |
| -W or --no-views| Do not export the views | true |
| -m or --no-schemas | Do not export the schema with only the data exported |
| -s or--statement-size | Control the size of the `INSERT` statements; the unit is bytes |
| -F or --filesize | The file size of the divided tables. The unit must be specified such as `128B`, `64KiB`, `32MiB`, and `1.5GiB`. |
| --filetype| Exported file type (csv/sql) | "sql" |
| -o or --output | Exported file path | "./export-${time}" |
| -S or --sql | Export data according to the specified SQL statement. This command does not support concurrent export. |

> | --consistency | flush: use FTWRL before the dump <br/> snapshot: specify the dump files' location through TSO <br/> lock: execute `lock tables read` on all tables to be dumped <br/> none: dump without adding locks, which sacrifices consistency <br/> auto: MySQL flush, TiDB snapshot | "auto" |

Reviewer 2: `snapshot` is not for location.
sacrifices consistency sounds weird.
`auto: MySQL flush, TiDB snapshot` is not changed.

Author: ```suggestion
| --consistency | flush: use FTWRL before the dump <br/> snapshot: specify the dump files' location through TSO <br/> lock: execute `lock tables read` on all tables to be dumped <br/> none: dump without adding locks, which cannot guarantee consistency <br/> auto: MySQL defaults to using flush, TiDB defaults to using snapshot | "auto" |
```
Can you give me a more detailed description of  `snapshot: 通过 tso 指定 dump 位置`? @lichunzhu

Reviewer 3: I think `位置` should be `快照时间点`.

Author: The final version: `snapshot: 通过指定 TSO 来 dump 某个快照时候的 tidb 数据`

| --snapshot | snapshot TSO; valid only when `consistency=snapshot` |
| --where | Specify the scope of the table backup through the `where` condition |
| -p or --password | The password of the linked node |

> | -P or --port | The port of the linked node | 4000 |

Reviewer 2: port for the database connection

Author: ```suggestion
| -P or --port | The port of the connected database host | 4000 |
```
Is it more accurate? (see [zh version](https://github.com/pingcap/docs-cn/pull/4096/files#diff-6f3d525218a463bc3b428acd35c6d223R238) also) @lichunzhu

Reviewer 2: Yes

> | -u or --user | The username of the linked node | "root" |

Reviewer 2: ditto

| --dump-empty-database | Export the `CREATE DATABASE` statements of the empty databases | true |

> | --tidbMemQuotaQuery | Maximum memory used by a single query when exporting TiDB database | 34359738368(32GB) |

Reviewer 2: Invalid. The line is duplicated with the last line. Same deletion should be done in chinese version.

| --ca | The address of the certificate authority file for TLS connection |
| --cert | The address of the client certificate file for TLS connection |
| --key | The address of the client private key file for TLS connection |
| --csv-delimiter | Delimiter of character type variables in CSV files | '"' |
| --csv-separator | Separator of each value in CSV files | ',' |
| --csv-null-value | Representation of null values in CSV files | "\\N" |
| --escape-backslash | Use backslash (`\`) to escape special characters in the export file | true |

> | --output-filename-template | The data file names in the [golang arguments](https://golang.org/pkg/text/template/#hdr-Arguments) format <br/> Support the `{{.DB}}`, `{{.Table}}`, and `{{.Index}}` arguments <br/> The three arguments represent the database name, table name, and block ID of the data file | '{{.DB}}.{{.Table}}.{{.Index}}' |

Reviewer 2: s/golang arguments/golang templates
s/block/chunk

Author: I switch `golang templates` to `golang arguments` in https://github.com/pingcap/docs-cn/pull/4096/files#diff-6f3d525218a463bc3b428acd35c6d223R248 because `in the format of the golang arguments` is more appropriate. What do you think? @lichunzhu

Reviewer 2: But actually here we should fill in `go template` language. There is no `golang arguments`.

Author: Okay, got. Then I'll update it to `The data file names in the format of golang template`. Is it accurate?

Reviewer 2: `The filename templates represented in the format of golang template` This one
